TITLE: The Clean Bulking Diet: 13 Training Tips to Gain Muscle, Not Fat
AUTHOR: 
WEBSITE: levelsprotein.com
URL: https://levelsprotein.com/blogs/diet/clean-bulking-diet?srsltid=AfmBOopl0xWbSdTp2jXpevEZW9KmQyfLtnU8dYNY_-4092ku9ESwKtAJ
TYPE: Article

Once upon a time, bulking diets were for skinny guys who wanted bigger arms.

But these days, everybody knows that lifting heavy and eating well are the fast track to an enviable physique.

In fact, medical evidence even shows having more lean muscle improves your quality of life and reduces your risk of serious illness[*].

The only problem? If you aren’t careful, you’ll gain weight (fat) in all the wrong places.

In this article, you’ll learn the best way for men and women to bulk up, why clean bulking is wiser than dirty bulking, and 13 tips for packing on lean muscle wherever you want it!

What is Clean Bulking?

Bulking refers to the practice of consuming a caloric surplus — eating more calories than you burn each day on average — to gain weight intentionally.

Clean bulking is the same thing as bulking, but with the added goal of minimizing fat gain. When using this more cautious method of adding weight, people typically choose their foods with care, track macronutrients closely, and adjust calories as needed to prevent the accumulation of excess body fat.

What is Dirty Bulking?

Dirty bulking is essentially the opposite of clean bulking: little concern for fat gain, lots of extra calories, and often the inclusion of lots of fast foods and other processed foods.

So, which one is right for you?

Plenty of people bulk and cut, bulk and cut, but never seem to make any real progress. What’s the point of gaining and losing the same 20 pounds over and over?

Unless you’re a competitive bodybuilder and have some serious “hormonal assistance” (ahem, performance-enhancing drugs), bulking up fast then cutting hard isn’t the best way to achieve your ideal physique. Keeping fat gain to a minimum in the first place is far more efficient.

13 Tips to Gain Lean Muscle Instead of Unwanted Fat

1. Set Realistic Goals

It’s a cliche, but it’s true: if you want to achieve something meaningful, first you must set goals.

The trick is to set goals that are ambitious, but reasonably realistic. Your muscle goals also need to be clearly defined and measurable.

One way to achieve a proper balance is to set multiple, related goals that all lead to the results you want. That way, success doesn't hinge on a single outcome.

For example, if you want to become more athletic and add tons of muscle to your glutes and legs, the following goals would work exceptionally well together:

Squat bodyweight for 15 reps

Deadlift double bodyweight

Add 2-3 inches onto your hip circumference

Gain 1-2 inches on each thigh

Increase body weight by at least 10-15 pounds

Don’t allow waist circumference to increase more than 1-2 inches

Another helpful trick: break all your major, long-term goals down into incremental ones.

Keeping with the above examples, squatting and deadlifting bodyweight with good form are necessary incremental goals before you can do more reps or weight. Additionally, gaining 5 pounds in the next several months would be a great start on the way to a long-term goal of gaining 10-15 pounds.

Also, hold yourself accountable, and review your goals frequently to stay motivated. Tell friends or share your goals and results on social media, too.

2. Measure Your Results

Measuring your results is equally essential to setting goals. Actually, if you don’t measure results, there’s hardly any point in setting goals!

First, choose a time interval for measurement. For most people, once a week is perfect. Or if you consider yourself a hardgainer — someone who has an unusually difficult time gaining weight — once every two weeks is better because it’ll help you stay patient.

Then, choose a few easy-to-gauge but relevant metrics. Here are some starting points:

Bodyweight (if you want to gain significant lean muscle mass, it’s going to need to increase)

Shoulder circumference at the widest point (for an excellent way to gauge upper body muscle mass, go all the way around your chest, arms, and back — you’ll need a helper)

Waist circumference (We’re willing to bet your goals don’t involve a larger waist, so keep an eye on this)

A weekly photo (nothing fancy, just be consistent with angle and lighting — it works best to compare this week’s photo to a photo from several weeks ago or longer)

Along with the above basics, there are plenty of other ways to track your progress. For example, strength during workouts, or how a favorite piece of clothing fits. Be creative!

And don’t over-measure. Measure and ponder your results once a week, and put in work the other six days. Stop stepping on the scale every day or striking poses each time you walk by the mirror!

Also, here’s the real key to making measurements work for you: if you’re currently making measurable progress, don’t make any changes to your diet or training.

Too many people change their approach to diet and training constantly. If you listen to what your measurements are telling you, you’ll avoid this mistake and achieve much better results overall.

Consider DEXA

Finally, if it fits in your budget, consider a DEXA body composition test once or twice a year, too.

DEXA is the most accurate and precise method available to the majority of people, and it gives you a clear idea of your body fat and lean muscle mass[*]. It’s a fantastic way to set and measure long-term physique goals.

3. Prioritize Calories First

If you want to bulk up, extra calories are your friend. Actually, your best friend.

Overeating is a potent way to add muscle mass, and the chances are slim that you’ll gain muscle without consuming excess calories[*].

As a matter of fact, some studies show that overeating even without weight training can increase your lean body mass[*][*]. (Doing so is not advisable, because people appear to gain equal amounts of fat and muscle, but it illustrates the effectiveness of a calorie surplus.)

Instead of using complicated formulas to determine your optimal intake, your best bet is to take an educated guess and then measure your results. Then you can simply adjust calories upward if you’re not gaining muscle, or downward if you’re gaining too much fat.

If you’re thin and have trouble gaining, start with a daily calorie intake based on your body weight (in pounds) times 20. For example, a 140-pound person would eat 2800 calories (kcal) per day as a starting point.

Or if you want to be more conservative and avoid gaining fat, try bodyweight times 15. In that case, a 180-pound person would eat 2700 calories per day initially.

Then, measure your caloric intake and results for about two weeks. Dozens of different free food tracking apps make it easy to track calories (and macronutrients).

After a few weeks, you’ll be able to follow your new diet by habit, so, remember you don’t have to track calories indefinitely. Simply resume tracking if you hit a plateau or need to make changes.

And if you do hit a weight gain plateau, try adding or subtracting 250-500 calories from your daily intake as needed, but don’t make changes more frequently than every two weeks.

4. Macros Second, Especially Protein

Macronutrients (protein, fat, and carbs) matter when it comes to bulking up, but not as much as calories.

So make sure you don’t nitpick over macros until you’ve dialed in calories. Sufficient calories will drive your results, while the correct macros can optimize them.

Protein Intake for Bulking

The most critical macro for gaining lean muscle happens to be protein[*][*][*].

Start with 25-30% of calories from protein, then try going up from there if you feel a need to fine-tune.

For example, if you eat 2500 calories per day, at Levels we advise about 160-190 grams of total protein per day as a starting point to build muscle mass.