Should you do sumo or conventional deadlifts? This is one of the common questions I get at workshops.

The best way to decide if sumo or conventional deadlifts are better is to try both for 6 months before committing to one or the other. Your hip angle, arm and torso length, muscular strength, and body weight will affect which exercise feels more comfortable.

You also may want to choose the one with more benefits for you. Here are the differences between the sumo and conventional deadlifts:

Conventional deadlifts have more of a forward lean.

Sumo deadlifts have less range of motion, so they're easier on your back.

Conventional deadlifts use more lower back muscles.

Sumo deadlifts use more quads.

Read on as I share the priority checklist I use to help athletes decide which is best for their goals. I also asked two other respected powerlifting coaches how they decided. Let's dive in!

Differences Between Sumo vs. Conventional Deadlifts

You'll be directly over the bar with sumo deadlifts and leaned forward slightly with conventional.

There are three main differences between conventional and sumo deadlifts:

Start Position: Conventional deadlifts use 5-10% more forward lean with shoulders slightly in front of the bar, while in sumo deadlifts, shoulders should align directly over the bar. It would be counterproductive to use a forward lean for sumo deadlifts.

Range of Motion: Sumo deadlifts have a 20-25% shorter range of motion than conventional deadlifts. Your feet are wider, so you don't need to lift the bar as high, leading to less mechanical work needed for sumo. This makes the sumo deadlift better if you have lower back issues.

Muscles Used: Conventional deadlifts use more lower back muscles (spinal erectors) and glutes, while sumo deadlifts emphasize the quads more. A study by Escamilla et al. (2002) found the sumo deadlift also significantly engages the vastus medialis and vastus lateralis (specific quad muscles), and the tibialis anterior (front of shin), reflecting the different muscle activation patterns between the two styles.

Want to increase your deadlift by 100 lbs? Read the full post. Or check out my article that discusses Are Sumo Deadlifts Harder Than Traditional Deadlifts?

Want to improve your deadlift technique? Let one of our coaches help you get stronger

Similarities Between Sumo vs. Conventional Deadlifts

Lockout position: Knees and hips should lock simultaneously for both conventional and sumo deadlift

It's important to recognize that while the two deadlift styles look different, there are two main similarities.

Building Muscular Tension: Both deadlift styles require creating maximal tension in the start position. If you don't have muscular tension before lifting, your sumo and conventional deadlifts will be inefficient off the floor. To build tension, grab the bar with a strong grip, set your back by squeezing your lats, engage your glutes and hamstrings by actively pulling them into the start position, maintain a neutral head position, and drive your feet into the floor.

Timing of Lockout: In both conventional and sumo deadlifts, the ideal timing for most lifters is for the hips and knees to lock out simultaneously, ensuring a smooth and efficient lift completion. This timing is a common goal for lifters, with some variations among advanced athletes.

If you want to improve your deadlift lockout, you can read about my 10 tips. Or check out my article on whether you should squat and deadlift on the same workout.

When To Choose Sumo vs Conventional Deadlifts

I usually start athletes on the conventional deadlift, then let them try both over 6 months. Whichever they're more comfortable with is the winner.

However, here is a priority checklist I move through with clients that can help you decide which to choose.

Longer Arms & Torsos Will Prefer Conventional Deadlifts

Lengths Conventional Sumo Short torso + Short arms ✅ Short torso + Average arms ✅ Short torso + Long arms ✅ Average torso + Short arms ✅ Average torso + Long arms ✅ Long torso + Short arms ✅ Long torso + Average arms ✅ ✅ Long torso + Long arms ✅ Your arm and torso length impact how comfortable sumo or conventional deadlifts feel.

According to Dr. Michael Hales, lifters with shorter arms could benefit from sumo deadlifts, while long arms and/or long torsos often prefer conventional deadlifts. If you have average arms, it's up to your preference.

To figure out if your arms and torso are long or short, you can measure them and then refer to the table below:

Torso length: Start at the hip bone (greater trochanter) and measure to the top of the head

Arm length: Start at the shoulder joint (humeral head) to the tip of the middle finger.

Overall height: From the base of the floor to the top of the head.

Dr. Hales provides the following guidelines (divide your body length by your overall height and turn into a percentage):

Short Average Long Torso Less than 32% 32% Greater than 32% Arms Less than 38% 38% Greater than 38%

My torso is over 32%, so it is long. Yet my arms are 38% of my overall height, so are average.

Based on the above proportions, I would be classified as someone with average arms, long legs, and a long torso, resulting in limb lengths suited for conventional or sumo deadlifting.

If you're average as well, then a semi-sumo deadlift stance might be more appropriate for you.

Want to improve your sumo deadlift technique? Check out my article on the best Sumo Deadlift Cues. If you have short arms, you should read my article on Deadlifting With Short Arms because I provide 4 tricks that will help you get better leverage. Or if you have long legs, you should read my article on Deadlifting For Tall Guys.

Larger Hip Angles Will Prefer Sumo Deadlifts

Picture attributed to Behrang Amini, MD/PhD

If your hip angle, where the femur connects to the pelvis, is greater than average (130°), you'll feel more comfortable pulling sumo. Alternatively, if your hip angle is lower than average, you'll feel more comfortable with conventional deadlifts.

How big is your hip angle? Well, you could get an X-ray, but it's not cheap, so try the Supine Assessment at home.

The idea is to move your femur through a range of motion and track the positions where the pelvis starts to roll without any further movement at the hip itself. Essentially, you're moving the hip into a position where you create bone to bone restrictions and further movement can't be accomplished at that joint. Dean Somerset

You're better suited for sumo deadlifts if you can keep pulling your hip through flexion as the knee rolls to the outside. This is because the angle of your femur and hip is greater.

You're better suited for conventional deadlifts if you can get a decent amount of flexion by keeping your knee more in line with your shoulder. This is because the angle of your femur and hip is lower.

These angles will determine the range of motion your hips can go through comfortably. This is why you should have proper deadlift shoes.

If you get hip pain while sumo deadlifting, make sure to check out my 7 tips to help fix it!

Lifter Lifters Will Prefer Sumo Deadlift

Lighter lifters less than 204 lbs (93kg) for men and less than 138 lbs (63kg) for women will prefer to deadlift in a sumo stance, and heavier lifters will prefer to deadlift in a conventional stance.

To understand this, let's look at the 2016 IPF World Powerlifting Championships data. The charts below show that as the best powerlifters went up in weight class, they chose to do conventional deadlifts, while the lighter lifters chose to do sumo deadlifts.

Men's Deadlift Stance Comparison By Weight

Data from MyStrengthBook

As you can see, 100% of the 59kg class used sumo deadlifting, and less than 15% of the 120k+ class used sumo.

Women's Deadlift Stance Comparison By Weight

Data from MyStrengthBook

The trendline is similar in women, and you'll have a higher percentage of either lift at each end of the bodyweight spectrum.

The decision becomes clear: if you fall on either end of the extreme, the lowest or heaviest bodyweight class. Choose the dominant style and see if it feels more comfortable to you.

However, if you fall somewhere in the middle, you will need to experiment more with the two styles to see which one works best.

To learn more about how different body types impact powerlifting, check out my article on What Body Type Is Best For Powerlifting? (Science-Backed).

Lifters With Stronger Backs Will Prefer Conventional Deadlifts

If you have a stronger low and mid-back, then go with conventional deadlifts.

If you have stronger quads, then go with sumo deadlift.

You'll want to play to your strengths as much as possible. For the conventional deadlifts, because you'll have slightly more forward lean, you'll have greater muscular activation in the trunk muscles, such as the spinal erectors.

However, the sumo deadlifts require greater knee extension, which places more loading demand on the quads.

What if you have a muscle weakness?

If you have a quad weakness, I would encourage you to deadlift conventionally until you develop stronger quads.

If an athlete is more suited to lift sumo based on their hip structure, proportions, or bodyweight, I will work on their weakness and experiment with sumo deadlifting once they're stronger.

If you have a rounded back when you deadlift, read my full post about how to address it. Or if you want more options, check out the Top Deadlift Alternatives. If you want to learn whether you should squat or deadlift more, read my article on squat and deadlift ratios.

How Pro Coaches Choose Between Sumo and Conventional Deadlifts

From my experience, when an athlete walks through the door on their first day, I always get them to deadlift using the conventional stance.

The main reason is that a conventional deadlift is simply an easier movement to learn. It requires less mobility at the hip level, and initially, it will feel more natural for the athlete. While one style will produce greater performance benefits, those outcomes take years to realize. So, it's better to have my athletes feel confident pulling from the floor first before trying to optimize their one-rep max.

When considering sumo deadlifts, I prioritize the factors outlined in this article. First, I look at the athlete's hip structure and proportions. Then I look at their body weight and muscular strength. If the athlete is better suited for sumo deadlifting, then I will begin to transition them and commit to sumo deadlifting for at least six months.

In my experience, six months is simply the time it takes an athlete to find a natural position for sumo deadlifts.

To get other perspectives, I asked two respected powerlifting coaches:

In practice, we've operated off of the belief that people should try both and use the one they are strongest in on a permanent basis moving forward. The study by Hales (2010) has rarely factored into us making a successful recommendation of stance. Jason Tremblay, The Strength Guys

You can see how Jason doesn't take too much stock on the recommendations based on proportion sizes. What Jason prioritizes is simply how the athlete is performing over a longer period of time.



I initially let the athlete decide his or her deadlift stance based on what they feel is most comfortable because an athlete will typically execute better when the lifts feel good. As they progress into heavier loads and form begins to break down, I encourage them to employ the stance where they can execute consistently and efficiently while simultaneously taking advantage of their unique leverages to lift the most weight possible. Matt Gary, Supreme Sports Performance & Training

Both Jason and Matt give a lot of credit to how athletes feel after trying both styles. As such, you should use the same approach. Experiment with conventional and sumo, and select the style that feels the most comfortable and allows you to lift the heaviest weight over time.

The Sumo deadlift was rated as one of my top deadlift progressions to take your lift from a beginner to advanced level.

FAQ

Is Sumo Deadlift Allowed in Powerlifting Competitions?

Yes, sumo deadlifts are allowed in powerlifting competitions conducted by the top powerlifting federations including the International Powerlifting Federation (IPF), the World Powerlifting Congress (WPC), and the United States Powerlifting Association (USPA).

Why Is My Sumo Deadlift Weaker Than Conventional?

Your sumo deadlift could be weaker than your conventional deadlift due to less developed quadriceps and adductors. If the angle of your hip is lower or your arms are longer, you will struggle more with sumo deadlifts.

More Deadlift Resources:

Then let us know on Instagram which you prefer. Are you a conventional deadlift person? Or do you love sumo deadlifts?

Note: If you do end up using the conventional deadlift, you can implement various stances. Make sure to read my article on How To Choose Your Deadlift Stance.

References

Escamilla, RF., Francisco, AC., Kayes, AV., Speer, KP., Moorman, CT. (2002) An electromyographic analysis of sumo and conventional style deadlifts. Science Sport Exercise, 34(4): 682-688.

Hales M (2010) Improving the Deadlift: Understanding Biomechanical Constraints and Physiological Adaptations to Resistance Exercise. Strength and Conditioning Journal32(4):44–51.

About The Author

Avi Silverberg holds a Master of Science in Exercise Science with a research focus on powerlifting training. He's been the Head Coach for Team Canada Powerlifting since 2012 and has coached over 4500 attempts in international competition. You can connect with him on Instagram or LinkedIn.