TITLE: Fat Loss Workouts
AUTHOR: 
WEBSITE: muscleandstrength.com
URL: https://www.muscleandstrength.com/workouts/fat-loss
TYPE: Article

8 Week Fat Loss Workout for Beginners This 4-day program is designed to help you burn fat without burning too much time on the clock. You'll also learn the basics of fat loss nutrition and recovery. View Workout

Spring Shred: 8 Week Fat Loss Workout Plan The time for mass has passed and now you can sculpt your shredded masterpiece. This 5 day program will help you bring out your best just in time for summer. View Workout

Return to Ripped: 6 Week Fat Loss Workout Program This versatile six week workout routine is designed to help you torch unwanted fat and can be complete in the gym or at home, with simple modifications! View Workout

6 Week Summer Workout Challenge Get in shape and look great for summer in 6 short weeks! This 6-day fat-loss program combines supersets and HIIT for the ultimate calorie-burning combination. View Workout

8 Week Beginner Fat Loss Workout for Women This 4-day workout plan combines weight training and cardio to help you get leaner! Each day is separated into upper and lower body sessions with core work mixed into both. View Workout

Fat Blaster: 6 Day Weight/Cardio Cutting Workout A workout for people who have finished bulking and have excess fat to lose. It combines weight training with 3 days of cardio, and 1 day of rest. View Workout

4 Day Dumbbell and Bodyweight Fat Loss Workout Stuck at home with only a single pair of light dumbbells? This 6-week program utilizes unilateral training and bodyweight exercises to help you achieve results! View Workout

12 Week Women's Bikini Prep Workout Program This workout, designed by womens bikini competitor Traisha Martin, is the exact workout she has been following while on her bikini competition prep. View Workout

3 Day Total Body Sculpting Circuit Workout Sculpt your entire body in 3 workouts per week. This workout program utilizes full body circuits to keep constant tension on your muscles during the workout. View Workout

Doug's 6 Day Cutting Routine This intense cutting routine hits each muscle group twice a week on a 3 days on, 1 day off schedule. Use this routine to burn fat and get ripped! View Workout

Doug's 4 Day Mega Cutting Routine Doug's mega cutting workout routine is a 4 day split combining weights and cardio designed to lose fat while maintaining muscle mass. View Workout

Livin' Lean: 8 Week Kick-Starter Fat Loss Workout Learn the correct nutritional and lifestyle habits you need to implement to lose body fat, then pair them with this 8 week workout and start "Livin' Lean"! View Workout

2 Day Intense Fat Loss & Muscle Tone Workout This intense 2 day full body workout is designed for decreasing fat and increasing muscle tone. This workout was put to the test, and after 4 weeks subjects lost body fat and gained muscle mass! View Workout

Fight to be Fit Training Program This full body workout incorporates some fighting style cardio with a high volume weight training routine to help you fight for your fitness. View Workout

Density Giant Set Training: Maintain Muscle During Fat Loss The density set training system is a perfect workout for someone looking to drop fat, hold on to muscle, and train hard and heavy. Each session is brief and intense, but extremely effective! View Workout

Hollywood Muscle: Zac Efron Inspired Workout Routine Work out like you're about to be on the set of Baywatch with this workout routine inspired by Zac Efron in this month's edition of Hollywood Muscle. View Workout

Core, Strength And Fat Burn Workout Potent, powerful and anything but boring. This hardcore fat burning, strength and core building workout will leave you looking and feeling great. View Workout

5 Cross Training Workouts For General Conditioning The following 5 cross-training daily workout routines contain a variety of exercises aimed at improving your overall conditioning. View Workout

Build Your Own Cross Training Daily Workouts Here is a fun way to come up with your daily cross training workouts. This random generation system has the potential to create up to 100,000 unique workout variations. View Workout

5 Day Minimal Equipment Home Workout Routine Don't let closed gyms and quarantine hold you back from reaching your goals. These 5 at-home workouts will keep you on track, all with minimal to no equipment. View Workout

50 Rep Fat Loss HIIT Treadmill And Kettlebell Workout Blast fat using only a kettlebell, bodyweight exercises and some HIIT treadmill sprinting. Exercises move along in a taxing 10 to 50 rep progression pattern. View Workout

6 Week High-Intensity Functional Training Workout This 6-week program combines high-intensity interval training methodologies with functional bodybuilding to transform your physique and up your athletic performance. View Workout

3 Day Kettlebell and Bodyweight Workout Grab a kettlebell and smash through this 4-week workout program designed to help you shed excess weight and improve your endurance regardless of your experience. View Workout

5 Fat Loss Workouts From Cory Gregory & MusclePharm Cory Gregory from MusclePharm presents five unique and incredibly effective fat burning workout variations. Get off the treadmill and start burning more calories. View Workout

Spring Fat Melter: 6 Week Fat Loss Workout Kick off your summer shredding with a quick and intense program. This 6 week fat loss workout supersets resistance training with cardio for maximum workout intensity. View Workout

Density Training For Fat Loss: No Cardio Required Looking to torch fat but tired of boring cardio sessions? Try density training. This article features intense 20, 30 and 40 minutes twice a week fat loss workout sessions. View Workout

Dumbbell & Bodyweight HIIT Workout: A Real Calorie Burner Torch through calories with this partner-based cardio workout. A series of 12 exercises are performed in a back and forth manner, adding reps with each set. View Workout

Get Ripped With Supersets & Giant Sets This 4 day workout program from bodybuilder Brad Borland utilizes supersets, giant sets and restricted rest to shred fat. Sample 2100 calorie per day eating plan is included. View Workout

The Ripped Freak Training Program Get the most out of your workout with the The Ripped Freak Training Program and 5-Minute Ripped Solution, designed to help you maximize muscle growth, increase performance, and burn fat! View Workout

Cut Like Cutler Trainer - Cycle 2 Follow the workout logs for Cycle 2 of the Cut Like Cutler trainer. Week 3 is Heavy training and Week 4 is more Moderate. View Workout

Cut Like Cutler Trainer - Cycle 4 Follow the workout logs for Cycle 4 of the Cut Like Cutler trainer. Week 7 is Heavy training and Week 8 is more Moderate. View Workout

Cut Like Cutler Trainer - Cycle 6 Follow the workout logs for Cycle 6 of the Cut Like Cutler trainer. Week 11 is Heavy training and Week 12 is more Moderate. View Workout

Coach Myers's Top 3 New Year Shreds Workouts Accomplish all of your New Year's goals with this 30 day shred from Coach Myers composed of heavy lifting to build muscle and HIIT to spark fat loss! View Workout

Three 30 Minute Fat Burning Weekly Workouts Burn fat in just three 30 minute workouts a week! Don't think it's possible? Check out this density based full body workout program & start seeing results! View Workout

10 Weeks to Shredded: Maximize Your Fat Loss with this Workout Maximize your fat loss with this 10 week shred workout program. Plus as a bonus - 5 tips to get the most fat loss out of the program! View Workout

The Daisy Ridley Last Jedi Inspired Workout Program This Daisy Ridley Last Jedi Workout Program was designed based on Daisy's training videos to help people of this galaxy reach their greatest potential. View Workout

Spring cLEANing Workout Program: 12 Weeks to Shredded! What's Spring cLEANing? It's time to get rid of that winter gut and lean out for spring! Use this 12 week fat loss workout program to help you get there. View Workout

Summer Burn: 12 Week Fat Melting Workout The trick to being summer shredded is getting shredded before summer arrives. Use this 12 week Summer Burn program so you can show off at the pool this year! View Workout

The Body Fat Blaster: 8 Weeks to a Ripped Physique Blast fat with these workout, nutrition, and lifestyle recommendations. Commit to it all for the next 8 weeks and reap the benefits by the end of summer! View Workout

The Express Workout Program: Quick Workouts for Quick Results If life responsibilities are holding you back from spending hours in the gym daily, cut back on the amount of times you go and bump up the intensity! View Workout

Muscle & Strength’s 10 Week Women’s Fat Loss Workout This 10 week women's fat loss training program is perfect for any healthy woman who is looking to transform her body through a good weight lifting program. View Workout