TITLE: How To Build Muscle (Explained In 5 Levels)
AUTHOR: 
WEBSITE: jeffnippard.com
URL: https://jeffnippard.com/blogs/news/how-to-build-muscle-explained-in-5-levels
TYPE: Article

Building muscle is a process that can be learned and achieved fairly easily. To assist you in navigating through that process, in this blog, I’m going to explain how to do it in five levels of increasing complexity, starting with the most basic explanation and getting more detailed as we go along.

While preparing for this blog, I consulted with a number of different experts, including a professor in Muscle Metabolism (Dr. Jorn Trommelen), an industry leader in the field of Biomechanics (Andrew Vigotsky), and an active researcher in the field of Strength and Conditioning (Dr. Eric Helms). I’m also a Pro-Natural Bodybuilder myself and I’ve been studying the science behind getting jacked for over a decade, while coaching people from around the globe.

Pulling primarily from these sources, along with some specific research analysis that are referenced at the end of the blog, I’ve outlined these five levels as succinctly as possible so that you’ll have little difficulty pinpointing your current level of understanding on how to build muscle.

Before we dive in, I have a favour to ask. As you read through the various levels, take note of the specific level you got to before you started zoning out or getting lost. Let us know in the comments at the end of the blog.

LEVEL 1: NOOB



Explaining muscle growth to a non-lifter

Building muscle is actually quite simple. All you really need to do is lift weights and eat protein.

Protein, of course, is the macronutrient found in foods like fish, chicken, meat, dairy, beans, lentils, and protein powders. And when you weight train, your muscles start to think, well if we’re going to keep lifting these heavy weights, I’d better start to get some bigger muscles to make this easier.

This is called an Adaptive Response. It’s kind of like when you play guitar. Your fingertips start to get harder and grow calluses as an adaptive response to pressing against the strings. It hurts at first, but then it gets easier as you build the thicker skin layer.

However, lifting weights isn’t quite enough on its own to build muscle. In order to build something, you need building blocks and when it comes to muscle, the building blocks are called Amino Acids, which you get by eating protein. In essence, when you lift weights, you’re telling the muscle it needs to get bigger. Then, when you eat protein, you’re giving the muscle the building blocks it needs to actually grow.

LEVEL 2: NOVICE



Explaining muscle growth to a new lifter

In reality, it’s probably not quite good enough to just lift weights and eat protein to get really solid results.

For example, if for two years you've been lifting the exact same weight for the exact same reps, you're likely struggling at keeping the muscle growing. Sure, you’ll see some decent growth at the beginning because you’ve never lifted any weight before. But soon enough, that weight will no longer be challenging enough to present a sufficient stimulus for your muscle to continue growing.

This is why we need to expand the ‘lift weights part’ to lift weights with an emphasis on progressive overload.

Or, just increasing some training parameter over time.

From workout to workout, you'll need to add a little bit of weight or add an extra rep using the same weight.

For example, let’s say you’re trying to grow your biceps. Rather than doing three sets of ten reps with the same weight week after week and month after month, it’d be much more effective to do what’s illustrated in the following diagram.

At a certain point, you may not be able to increase the weight or reps each and every time, but that’s okay. There are still other ways to apply progressive overload.

Consider adding an extra set with the same reps and the same weight, doing something as simple as controlling the negative a little better, feeling a stronger mind-muscle connection where you more consciously feel the muscle squeezing and stretching as you lift, or swapping out for a new exercise and starting that overloading process again.

Also, on the nutrition side, you can do quite a bit better than just saying “eat protein.” To be more specific, the latest research shows that landing between 1.6-2.2 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day (about 0.7-1 gram per pound) is a good target for maximizing muscle gain.

For example, if you weigh 165 pounds or 75 kilos, you’d want to be eating somewhere in the range of 120-165 grams of protein per day for general muscle building. Although there may be some advantage in going a bit higher in certain advanced situations, this is a sufficient range for most.

It’s worth noting that if you’re very high in body fat, the grams per unit body weight approach won’t work as well. Let’s say you’re 300 pounds. In this case, you don’t really need 300 grams of protein per day. I simply prefer to use 1 gram of protein per centimeter in height because it works independently of body fat percentage.

Let’s check this example.

It’s not a perfect system, but it’ll get you in the right ballpark.

There is some evidence to suggest that spacing your protein across three to five meals throughout the day might be more ideal. If that suggestion holds true, it’s certainly much less important than simply hitting a daily protein target.

In fact, contrary to common belief, training is a much more powerful contributor to muscle growth than diet, and by quite a long shot.

So while it is true that a caloric surplus will drive muscle growth more effectively and dietary manipulations like protein timing can have some impact, I’m going to focus the remaining levels on maximizing the muscle response through resistance training.

LEVEL 3: AVERAGE



Explaining muscle growth to a regular lifter

Focusing on progressive overload is smart, but it still leaves a lot to be desired in the gym. For example, it doesn’t tell us:

“How HARD should we push it?”

“How many SETS should we do?”

“How many REPS should we do?”

“How HEAVY should we lift?”

Because of this limitation, next, I want to take a quick look at what the research says about the so-called Acute Training Variables.

EFFORT

This is the most fundamental variable for growth because no matter how much you optimize all the other stuff, if you aren’t pushing it hard enough, the muscles simply won’t grow - at least not optimally.

There’s currently a raging debate within the scientific community about exactly how hard we should push each set. A relatively small group of experts insist that all sets should be taken all the way to muscular failure. That is, your set is not complete until you are unable to complete another rep despite maximum effort.

However, the mainstream scientific consensus appears to be that it isn’t necessary to take sets all the way to failure, but you do need to be pretty close. You shouldn’t be leaving more than two or three reps in the tank for most of your sets.

Of course, there are a few exceptions where leaving five or more reps in the tank does make sense for recovery, especially when training primarily for strength. But as a general rule, most of your sets should be pretty close to failure, so you do need to push it hard - maybe harder than you think.

VOLUME

Technically referred to as the amount of work you do, this training variable was historically calculated as the number of sets times the number of reps times the amount of load.

But as of 2015, most practitioners began to think of volume simply as the number of hard sets you do.

It’s become a popular meme to think of volume as the “primary driver of hypertrophy.” Allow me to clarify that if I’ve ever said this, I no longer think it's the case.

Rather than more volume leading to more growth, what we instead see is a sort of inverted U trend. This means that more volume leads to more growth only up to a point, past which further increases don’t do anything extra. And then at a certain point, adding more volume seems to be counterproductive. There exists this volume sweet spot that seems to be a bit different for everyone.

I’ve noticed that many people are already doing more volume than they really need and would probably benefit more by reducing their volume and focusing more on effort and execution. The main point here is that you should experiment and figure out what dose of volume gives you the best balance of gains and recovery.

Still, based on what we know from the current science, something around 10-20 sets per body part per week seems to be a good range for most people and most muscles.

For example, if you’re running an upper-lower split that has you in the gym four days per week, your chest volume might look something like this.

INTENSITY

Despite its popular conflation with effort, intensity refers to how heavy the weight is. You can either lift heavy weights for low reps or light weights for high reps.

This leads to the question, “what’s the best for muscle growth?”

It turns out that as long as you’re taking sets sufficiently close to failure, you can maximize hypertrophy using high reps or low reps, or a combination of both.

Research has shown that reps as low as three and as high as 30 reps all cause similar muscle growth. However, there does seem to be a limit to how light you can go.

New data shows that when you lift weights lighter than 20 percent of your 1 rep max, you do see significantly less growth. In fact, the average rep count that subjects got with that load was 67 reps; not a very practical way to train.

The traditional 6-12 rep zone is kind of a myth in the sense that research shows that you can go well outside that range and still grow, as long as you’re training close to muscular failure. Still, I think there is some value in that 6-12 range because once you start dipping down below six reps, you can risk unnecessary strain on your joints and it can be practically more difficult to accumulate enough volume.

The more you go above 12 reps, the more you risk just burning yourself out as higher rep sets are harder to recover from.

For practical purposes, I suggest that the majority of your sets be in that 6-12 rep range or maybe even in the 15 zone. Smaller chunks of your workout then can be dedicated to lower reps for continued strength progression and higher reps for stimulative variety.

As I see it, exercise selection and execution is just as much an art as it is a science