TITLE: Squats: How To Do Them and Why They Rock
AUTHOR: 
WEBSITE: health.clevelandclinic.org
URL: https://health.clevelandclinic.org/proper-squat-form
TYPE: Article

Squats may seem simple, but proper form isn't just about lowering down and standing back up. How you move through each rep can make a big difference in building strength and avoiding injury.

Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

Sports medicine physician Matthew Kampert, DO, explains the benefits of squats and how to maximize their positive effects with proper form and technique.

What are squats?

Squats are an important exercise to help build lower body strength in your thighs, hips and butt. They also help build strength in the core muscles of your abdomen and lower back. All this can lead to improvement in your:

Flexibility

Balance

Endurance

“Squats are integral to athletic training programs, enhancing speed, agility, strength and power across various sports disciplines,” shares Dr. Kampert. “They also help you achieve everyday goals, especially as you age, so you can continue to bend over or lift heavy objects.”

Benefits of squats

In addition to improving strength, balance and endurance, proper squat form provides these benefits.

Works major muscle groups

Squats are a popular and foundational exercise because they engage multiple major muscle groups, including your:

Core (abdominal) muscles

Back muscles

Glutes

Hamstrings

Hip flexors

Quadriceps

Adductors

Calves

Burns calories and improves metabolism

Squatting helps burn calories both during and after exercise. One study found that squats burn about 35 calories per minute, aiding in weight management and fat loss.

“Squatting also stimulates the release of hormones, like testosterone and somatotropin,” Dr. Kampert says, “which are vital for muscle growth, metabolism and overall health.”

Advertisement

Improves lower body strength

Squat exercises are commonly used in strength-training routines for many athletes, but they’re helpful for anyone who’s interested in improving their lower-body strength. Your lower body fuels your ability to:

Walk

Run

Jump

Bend over

Rise to stand from a bed, chair or the ground

“By focusing on lower body strength, you also lower your risk of injuries, like hip flexor strains and sports hernias,” says Dr. Kampert.

Enhances stability and balance

You’re more prone to falls and injury as you age, but adding squats into your exercise routine can help keep you balanced.

“Strong glutes, for example, are essential for stability in various movements,” Dr. Kampert points out, “and the hip flexor muscles, calf muscles and adductors all contribute to maintaining balance and stability.”

Improves posture

Poor posture can cause all kinds of problems, including:

Back pain

Neck pain

Headaches

Lack of flexibility

By doing exercises like squats, you can work on the muscles that support your spine and improve your posture over time.

Helps with flexibility and mobility

Squats and other types of physical activity can improve your ability to move and walk more freely. It also helps you turn or change direction while reducing your risk of injury.

“Squatting promotes flexibility and mobility in the hips, knees and ankles,” says Dr. Kampert. “That can help improve athletic performance, prevent injuries and alleviate joint pain.”

Promotes healthy bones

Studies show that squats are one of the few types of exercises that can increase bone mineral density in people who already have osteoporosis. Why? Because they’re high-intensity, high-impact, weight-bearing exercises.

“These kinds of exercises help reduce the risk of osteoporosis and promote long-term bone health,” Dr. Kampert notes.

Prevents injuries

“The action of squatting mimics everyday movements like sitting and standing,” Dr. Kampert says. “This enhances your ability to efficiently perform these activities and reduces your risk of injury.”

Proper squat form

Video content: This video is available to watch online. View video online ( https://cdnapisec.kaltura.com/p/2207941/sp/220794100/playManifest/entryId/1_8je4jrva/flavorId/1_5f3sgelj/format/url/protocol/https/a.mp4 )

When you’re squatting, keep your:

Head facing forward

Chest up

Back straight

Core engaged

Maintaining this proper form will limit your chances of strain or injury while doing these exercises. It also helps to remember the difference between eccentric and concentric stages of squats as you slowly move toward the ground and then quickly push up from a squatting position.

Here’s how to do a basic squat correctly:

Stand tall with your feet shoulder-width apart and your toes pointed slightly outward. Hinge at your hips and push your butt back, like you’re sinking into a chair. Slowly lower your body by bending your knees and keeping them wide (no collapsing inward!). Lower your hips until your thighs are parallel to the ground or as far as you’re comfortable. While doing so, keep your knees in line with your toes and your weight on your heels. Maintain a neutral spine to prevent strain on your lower back, and hold the position for three to five seconds. Drive your body back up to the starting position by pushing through your heels. Reset your posture and alignment, then repeat the process for 10 to 15 reps.

Advertisement

If squatting proves difficult, you can hold onto a sturdy chair, countertop or railing for added balance and support. You can also do squats with your back against the wall.

Squat form tips

Performing a proper squat requires engaging your core and continuing to breathe as you move through each step. To avoid hurting yourself, it’s important to maintain this form and be consistent for each rep.

Dr. Kampert suggests these tips to make the most out of squats:

Breathe. Inhale as you lower, and exhale as you push back up. This breathing pattern helps stabilize your core and carry oxygen to your muscles as you squat.

Inhale as you lower, and exhale as you push back up. This breathing pattern helps stabilize your core and carry oxygen to your muscles as you squat. Start small. If you’re new to squats, start with simple bodyweight squats instead of using dumbbells, barbells or alternative movements. As your skills progress (or if you need additional support), try squat variations.

If you’re new to squats, start with simple bodyweight squats instead of using dumbbells, barbells or alternative movements. As your skills progress (or if you need additional support), try squat variations. Take your time. Sink as far into your squat as you’re comfortable. “As your strength and mobility improve over time, it’s safe to squat deeper if you’re not experiencing pain,” says Dr. Kampert.

Sink as far into your squat as you’re comfortable. “As your strength and mobility improve over time, it’s safe to squat deeper if you’re not experiencing pain,” says Dr. Kampert. Control your movements. At the bottom of your squat, engage your muscles to lift yourself back up. “Avoid bouncing or relying on momentum to lift you back up because you could strain a muscle if you’re not controlled in your movement,” Dr. Kampert cautions.

At the bottom of your squat, engage your muscles to lift yourself back up. “Avoid bouncing or relying on momentum to lift you back up because you could strain a muscle if you’re not controlled in your movement,” Dr. Kampert cautions. Try supporting exercises. When you’re not squatting, consider foam rolling and static stretching to help relieve tightness and provide additional support for future exercises.

Advertisement

It’s normal to experience some discomfort while you exercise, but you shouldn’t feel any sharp or sudden pain. If you do, consult a healthcare provider, physical therapist or athletic trainer who can evaluate your form and locate your source of pain.

“They’ll be able to provide personalized guidance and recommendations based on your individual goals and fitness level,” advises Dr. Kampert.

As with any exercise, remember: Squats take practice. The more you do them, the better you’ll get. As your strength, flexibility and mobility improve, so, too, will your squatting abilities.