TITLE: Bulking: What It Is and How to Do It
AUTHOR: Gavin Van De Walle, Ms, How We Reviewed This Article
WEBSITE: healthline.com
URL: https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/bulking
TYPE: Article

This article explains everything you need to know about bulking, including what it is, how to do it safely, and which foods you should eat and avoid.

Bulking is a bodybuilder term referring to a progressive increase in calories consumed beyond your body’s needs along with intense weight training. While some consider it unhealthy, others insist it’s a safe and effective way to gain muscle mass.

Bodybuilding consists of three main phases — bulking, cutting, and maintenance. Generally, bulking is meant to increase muscle mass and strength, whereas cutting is intended to shed excess body fat while maintaining muscle mass.

One review found that the average calorie intake of bodybuilders during the bulking phase was 3,800 calories per day for men and 3,200 for women, compared with 2,400 and 1,200 calories during the cutting phase, respectively ( 5 ).

During the cutting phase , bodybuilders eat fewer calories than their bodies require, which puts them at a disadvantage for building muscle. The goal of this phase is generally to maintain — not gain — muscle mass ( 2 , 3 , 4 ).

Cutting, or the fat loss phase, refers to a gradual decrease in calorie intake and increase in aerobic training to reduce excess body fat from the bulking phase, allowing for improved muscle definition ( 2 ).

To varying degrees, body fat tends to accumulate during bulking due to excess calorie intake ( 1 ).

Bulking is the muscle-gaining phase. You’re meant to intentionally consume more calories than your body needs for a set period — often 4–6 months. These extra calories provide your body with the necessary fuel to boost muscle size and strength while weight training ( 1 ).

The three main phases in bodybuilding are bulking, cutting, and maintenance. Among competitive bodybuilders, preparation for their contests can be considered a fourth phase.

Bodybuilding is both a recreational and competitive sport that rewards muscle size and definition.

Bulking requires consuming more calories than your body needs.

You can estimate your daily calorie needs by using a calorie counter, which considers your weight, sex, age, height, and physical activity level to estimate your daily calorie needs.

Experts recommend consuming 10–20% above your daily weight maintenance calorie needs during the bulking phase for an average weight gain of 0.25–0.5% of your body weight per week ( 1 , 6 , 7 ).

For example, if you need 3,000 daily calories per day to maintain weight, you should aim to consume 3,300–3,600 instead, depending on your experience level. For a person who weighs 150 pounds (68 kg), this equates to an increase of 0.4–0.8 pounds (0.2–0.4 kg) per week.

While novice bodybuilders who have 6 months or less of weight training experience should aim for the higher end of this calorie range, bodybuilders with several years of experience should target the lower end to limit increases in body fat ( 8 , 9 ).

If you’re gaining less or more than 0.25–0.5% of your body weight per week, you should adjust your calorie intake accordingly.

Macronutrients

Once you establish the number of calories you need for bulking, you can determine your macronutrient ratios.

Macronutrients — carbs, fats, and proteins — are the nutrients that are needed in larger quantities in your diet. Carbs and protein each contain 4 calories per gram, while fat packs 9.

Experts recommend that you get ( 4 , 6 ):

45–60% of your calories from carbs

30–35% of your calories from protein

15–30% of your calories from fat

For example, if you decide you need to eat 3,300 calories per day, your diet would contain:

371–495 grams of carbs

248–289 grams of protein

55–110 grams of fat

While you can make adjustments based on your dietary needs, the proportion of calories from protein should remain at 30–35% to support optimal muscle growth ( 4 , 6 ).

You can use calorie tracking apps to help you stay within your calorie budget and macronutrient ranges.