TITLE: Finding Purpose in Powerlifting
AUTHOR: Experience Life Staff, Joe Hays, Andrew Heffernan, Lauren Bedosky
WEBSITE: experiencelife.lifetime.life
URL: https://experiencelife.lifetime.life/article/finding-purpose-in-powerlifting/
TYPE: Article

See Joe’s Top 3 Takeaways

When I entered my first powerlifting competition, at age 58, I didn’t know what to expect. I was an old, skinny guy with a gut, and I was worried that I would fail. I’d only gotten serious about fitness at age 55, a time when a lot of guys think they’re past their prime.

Yet I swept every category in my age group at that 2018 event — I even broke four state records. It was so much fun and so validating: It proved that my hard work was paying off.

My performance surpassed my wildest expectations. I realized I had a talent, as well as a passion, for powerlifting.

I wanted to do it all again.

Staying Active

I wasn’t particularly athletic growing up. I played baseball, recreational soccer, and football, but I didn’t do organized sports after sixth grade. I stuck to neighborhood hockey and discovered rock climbing in high school.

Fitness became less accessible after I graduated from college, but I found ways to fit exercise into my life. At one of my first jobs, I met a guy who was into bodybuilding. I wanted to be stronger, so I asked him for advice. He gave me a routine that included free weights and machines, but I didn’t have goals. Simply working out and “being in shape” felt like what I was supposed to do. Without direction, my progress stalled.

A couple of years after my first son was born, in 1993, Life Time opened a club near my job in Woodbury, Minn., and I joined as a founding member. I stopped by the club to work out during lunch and brought my family on weekends. It became more of a family affair after my second son was born, in 1995.

Life got in the way as my sons grew older. I did a little of this and a little of that to stay in shape, but nothing stuck. Meanwhile, my diet consisted of fast food, ice cream, soda, and pizza.

In 2015, after our boys left home, my wife and I moved to be near the Life Time where I’d maintained my founders membership. I had no excuse not to go — but even so, I found enough reasons to keep me away for a full year. I’d drive by the club and beat myself up for not going in. I told

myself, many times over, I have to start going there.

And finally I just did.

Boot Camp

I walked in one night and saw a sign for an advanced group fitness class. I decided to give it a try — and got my butt kicked. I wasn’t in any shape to participate in a class like that. (Here are six tips to help keep yourself safe when trying a new group fitness class.)

One of the instructors encouraged me to try a boot camp–style class with a combination of cardio and strength training. When I did, I was hooked. That’s where I learned how to deadlift for the first time, and it turned out that I was pretty good at it. After that, I attended class three or four days a week.

I sought advice on how to change my eating habits to support my strength gains. At a trainer’s recommendation, I began tracking my meals and monitoring my macronutrients. Hitting these goals more consistently helped me feel stronger and more energized for my workouts.

In early 2018, I started working with another personal trainer at Life Time, who helped me focus on building my chest. He introduced me to powerlifting, and I quickly realized that I could keep up with the big guys. After a few months, he suggested I enter a powerlifting competition.

At these events, there are three lifts: squat, bench press, and deadlift. When it’s your turn for a lift, you have to follow a referee’s instructions for when to start, and you get three attempts.

Going into my first competition that August, I felt uneasy. Would I be able to listen to and respond correctly to the referee’s prompts while standing with 281 pounds on my back for a squat? Would I be able to squat to the proper depth so my attempt would be counted?

I decided to let go of my anxiety. My coach would be there competing as well, and my wife and son were coming along for moral support. And what the heck — even if I failed miserably, I could at least say I tried.

Needless to say, my success at that event felt unreal. I couldn’t believe I’d won and broken four records. I soon signed up for another competition, excited about my future with the sport.

Record Breaker

Most competitive powerlifters compete two or three times per year with a focus on getting stronger. For the past few years, I’ve focused on entering as many competitions as I could — I did 12 in 2023 — maxing out as much as possible to break state and national records. As of April 2024, I’ve broken 310 state, national, or world records.

Unfortunately, when you’re trying to max out, sometimes things go side­ways. You start thinking negative thoughts, or you get distracted or tired, and you wind up doing something stupid. That happened to me in September 2023, when I competed in two national-level competitions on the same day.

I did great in the morning session. I was tired when the afternoon session began, but I still felt ready to go. I made it through the squat and bench press, and my first attempt at the deadlift went great. But on my second, I must have been distracted because as I pulled the bar off the floor, I heard a pop and put the bar down.

I didn’t make a third attempt, which was good because I found out later that I’d torn 75 percent of my right biceps tendon. I had surgery after Thanksgiving and started the long, slow process of healing, which I was told would take four to six months.

Meanwhile, I wasn’t going to let this injury sideline me or slow me down — I had records to break! I was back in the club the next week working on my legs while I waited for my biceps to heal. I also did light work with bands on my right arm, stopping anytime I felt pain.

At a follow-up appointment, in January 2024, my surgeon gave me the green light to do all my normal exercises. At a competition three months later, I broke the Minnesota and ­national deadlift records for my age group.

Max Strength

Since then I’ve shifted my focus. Now, instead of aiming to break records, I’m homing in on my strength. My coach likes to say, “Perfect your technique and strength will follow.” Six years into my fitness journey, I’m still working on my technique, changing little things to make improvements.

If only I’d found powerlifting 45 years ago! It would be amazing to see what my younger self could have done with the right training. But I can only focus on getting stronger now — and having as much fun as I can along the way.

In the next few years I’d like to continue to finish among the top 10 in the world for my age group. Last year I was ranked No. 3 in the world.

Meanwhile, over the long term, my goals are to stay in shape and to continue powerlifting for as long as I can. I’ve competed against guys who are 85 or older, so I know I can keep doing this for a good 20-plus more years. Let’s go!