TITLE: Fixing Your Deadlift Lockout Issues
AUTHOR: Natalie Smith
WEBSITE: ironsidetraining.com
URL: https://www.ironsidetraining.com/blog/fixing-your-deadlift-lockout-issues
TYPE: Article

Step one: Approach the bar with confidence, certainty, and a level of self-assuredness that this weight is yours, leaving no doubt and no room for error, hoping and believing that today will be your day.

Step two: Stand up with it to competition standard- and successfully finish the lift.

A lot can go wrong between these two steps.

You set up for that lift with rage, channeling everything you’ve got,

Your hips are where they should be, your hands set, your shins close to the bar,

You give a big slack pull, brace through your belly, and break the floor, even getting it past your knees- but either: A) You simply can’t finish those extra couple of inches, no matter how hard you try, B) You hitch it, your knees lock and unlock, or there’s some downward motion- it’s not as clean as it should be, and your heart sinks with the realization that it doesn’t truly count.

Few raw lifters fail a lift at lockout due to a true weakness (but it does happen). However, many struggle with slow, gritty, inconsistent deadlift finishes- a technical fault worth addressing. After all, no one wants to be finishing their meet, unsure & anxious about what those judges’ decisions will be. Lockout issues are the most common reason for being red-lighted during your deadlifts, and it is our job as athletes to train to the standard.

Many Westside or geared lifters will tell you that the solution is to train your lockouts more often, do more rack and block pulls, and slap some chains on there- and while that’s not inherently wrong, it often doesn’t address the underlying issue.

The truth is, without a deadlift suit, the hardest part of the lift (where you’re working the most against gravity and the forces acting on your body) is usually either off the floor or below the knees. Once you get it past there, lockouts should be pretty doable. If this is not the case, generally speaking, there are likely some faulty positional aspects of your deadlift, compromising your efficiency at this end-range portion. Let’s decipher those, so you can acknowledge the root cause of your lockout weakness- and how to attack it.