TITLE: How to Start Exercising: A Beginner’s Guide to Working Out
AUTHOR: Arlene Semeco, Ms, How We Reviewed This Article
WEBSITE: healthline.com
URL: https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-start-exercising
TYPE: Article

If you’re considering starting to exercise but don’t know where to begin, this article is for you. Here’s all you need to know about starting a routine and sticking to it.

In the long term, exercise can help you achieve and maintain a healthy body weight and muscle mass and reduce your risk for chronic diseases, among many other benefits.

In the short term, exercise can help improve your mood, mental health, and sleep, as well as manage your hormones and blood pressure levels.

Regular exercise plays an important role in maintaining your health.

Understanding the different types of exercises and how to incorporate them into your weekly routine can help you start exercising. Some tips, such as joining a fitness class or doing mini-workouts, can help make exercise a long-term habit.

Common types of exercise include aerobic, strength, calisthenics, HIIT, boot camps, flexibility, and stability. You can do them individually or combined.

These activities can be done individually or combined. The important thing is to do what works best for you and to have fun with it.

There are various types of exercise:

The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans provides the following weekly recommendations as a minimum to help maintain physical and cognitive function and prevent chronic conditions:

Creating a sustainable exercise schedule or exercising at the same time every day can help you make it a habit. It’s important to choose a time that works best for you.

If you can’t find a 30-minute block, try incorporating at least three 10-minute mini-workouts throughout the day.

Consider looking at your current schedule to see where you can add at least 30 minutes of exercise daily. Common times include working out first thing in the morning, on your lunch break, or right after work.

Forming new exercise habits can feel challenging, especially if this is a big change from your current lifestyle. Many people also feel like they don’t have enough time to exercise.

Research suggests that you’re more likely to maintain an exercise routine long-term if:

Another key component of exercise success is to build a routine that you enjoy and can maintain over the long term.

Starting with small, achievable goals will help increase your chances of success and keep you motivated throughout the process.

For example, if your goal is to finish a 5-kilometer run , you can start by building a plan that includes shorter runs. Once you can finish those short runs, increase the distance until you can run the whole 5 kilometers in one session.

One way to do this is to start with a plan of easy steps to follow. Then you can continue building on it as your fitness level improves.

Once you decide to start exercising regularly, try to create a plan that includes attainable steps and goals.

It can also help you optimize your workout, making it easier for you and a personal trainer (if you choose to work with one) to understand your limitations and create an exercise plan tailored to your particular needs.

An early checkup can detect any health problems or conditions that could put you at risk for an injury during exercise.

This is particularly important for those new to strenuous and vigorous physical activities.

It’s important to speak with a healthcare professional and get a physical examination before starting an exercise routine.

It’s essential to consider a few things before starting a new workout routine.

The 1-week program above is just a simple sample to get you started. For more workout ideas and plans, check out the following links:

This program can be adjusted to your fitness level and made as challenging as you want.

Here is an easy-to-follow, 1-week exercise program that doesn’t require equipment and will take you 30 to 45 minutes a day to complete.

1. Stay hydrated

Drinking fluids throughout the day is essential for maintaining healthy hydration levels.

The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics provides the following recommendations for adult daily water consumption:

Men: 15.5 cups (3.7 liters)

15.5 cups (3.7 liters) Women: 11.5 cups (2.7 liters)

Replenishing fluids during exercise is essential for maintaining optimal performance, preventing injury, and maximizing recovery. This is especially true when exercising in hot temperatures.

2. Optimize your nutrition

Eating a well-balanced diet is one of the most important aspects of preventing chronic conditions and maintaining a healthy-for-you weight.

Eating the right foods can also help boost your energy levels to maximize your workouts and provide nutrients that support muscle recovery and growth.

For instance, carbohydrates can help fuel your muscles before exercise, especially high intensity exercise that lasts longer than 1 hour. Eating carbs after exercise can also replenish glycogen stores and assist with the absorption of amino acids into your muscles during recovery.

Additionally, protein helps improve muscle recovery after exercise, repair tissue damage, and build muscle mass.

Lastly, regularly consuming healthy fats could help promote fat burning instead of muscle loss, increase energy, and manage blood pressure and cholesterol levels.

Learn more about what to eat before working out and what to eat after working out.

3. Warm-up

Warming up before your workout refers to increasing your body temperature.

While this may be the traditional purpose, researchers suggest that warming up before exercising provides several physical and psychological benefits.

Warming up could prepare your body for physical exertion, improve flexibility, and reduce the risk of injury. It can also help get you in the right mindset for exercise.

To get warmed up, focus on raising your heart rate and targeting the specific body parts you’ll be using that day.

For instance, if you’re exercising your lower body, start your workout with aerobic exercises like leg kicks, half-squats, and walking lunges. For your upper body, perform arm circles and standing pushups.

Dynamic stretches are also a great way to get warmed up.

Learn more about how to warm up before exercising.

4. Cool down

Cooling down after working out is also important because it can help your body return to its normal state and restore breathing patterns.

According to the American Heart Association , stretching after exercise can also help reduce muscle soreness and tightness by reducing the buildup of lactic acid in your muscles and joints.

Some cool-down ideas include light walking after aerobic exercise or static stretching after resistance training.

5. Listen to your body

If you’re not used to working out regularly, be mindful of your limits.

If you feel pain or discomfort while exercising, stop and rest before continuing. Pushing through the pain is not a good idea, as it can cause injuries.

Also, remember that working out harder and faster is not necessarily better.