TITLE: Is lifting during pregnancy healthy?
AUTHOR: Pak Androulakis-Korakakis, Pak Androulakis Korakakis Works With Stronger Science As A Content, Product Manager. As A Researcher, Pak Did His Phd On, The Minimum Effective Training Dose For Powerlifting Strength, Is Currently A Visiting Scholar At The Applied Muscle Development Lab At Lehman College In New York City Where He Researches All Things Strength, Hypertrophy Related. As A Coach, Pak Works With Individuals Of All Sporting, Professional Backgrounds, Beginner Lifters To Competitive Strength
WEBSITE: strongerbyscience.com
URL: https://www.strongerbyscience.com/lifting-during-pregnancy/
TYPE: Article

I’m sure you’ve heard that lifting during pregnancy can be “dangerous,” “hurt the baby,” and all sorts of fear-mongering – usually based on little to no actual evidence.

But what does the evidence actually say?

A recently published systematic review and meta analysis involving 50 studies and over 47,000 participants looked at the effect of resistance training on a plethora of pregnancy-related variables, from prenatal health all the way to delivery outcomes and pelvic floor symptoms.

Resistance training, usually done as part of an exercise routine, resulted in ~50% reduction in gestational hypertension, a condition that can result in pregnancy complications if it develops. A similar relationship was also observed for gestational diabetes, where resistance training resulted in a ~38% reduction in the likelihood of developing gestational diabetes.

Interestingly, resistance training also reduced the risk of perinatal mood disturbances by ~50% in both the prenatal and postpartum periods, suggesting promising effects on both physical and psychological outcomes.

Just as interesting, resistance training did not result in an increase in many of the risks people are usually worried about. For example, rates of preterm birth, Caesarean delivery, and perineal injury appeared to be similar between those who exercised and those who didn’t, with some evidence suggesting that those who exercised had a somewhat longer first stage of labor, but without any meaningful differences in the second stage of labor.

Birthweight, gestational age, and the likelihood of delivering either a very small or very large baby were also unaffected by resistance training, with macrosomia (i.e., having a larger-than-normal birthweight) being less common in those who exercised. When it came to pelvic floor symptoms, limited data showed that those who either maintained or increased their strength during pregnancy reported lower rates of pelvic floor symptoms.

It’s important to note that the resistance training protocols used in the studies consisted mostly of short sessions of light lifting, often combined with other forms of physical activity. However, that’s not universally true. A couple years ago, we covered a study documenting the impact of continuing more intense weightlifting (i.e., snatch and clean & jerk) and CrossFit training during pregnancy, and it had similarly promising results. And, to give props where they’re due, both of these papers (the prior study of weightlifters and CrossFit athletes, and the present meta-analysis) were headed up by Dr. Christina Prevett and Dr. Margie Davenport. So, kudos to them for advancing the research and public understanding in this area of research.

In addition to the benefits already mentioned, new evidence suggests that resistance training may also support better day-to-day well-being throughout pregnancy. A 2025 systematic review of randomized controlled trials reported improvements in overall quality of life, including reduced fatigue, better sleep, fewer aches and pains (particularly low back and pelvic discomfort), and better physical functioning.

Overall, based on the current literature, lifting during pregnancy, when appropriately prescribed by a professional, appears to be not only safe but also a net positive!