TITLE: Split Workout Schedule: What To Know and Examples
AUTHOR: Tyler Read, Bsc, How We Reviewed This Article
WEBSITE: healthline.com
URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/split-workout-schedule
TYPE: Article

Keep reading to learn more about the benefits of workout splits and the most common types, so you can choose one to try based on your own goals and experience.

Regardless of the workout split you choose, it’s important to eat a balanced diet and give your muscles enough time to recover between each workout. This could help prevent injury and maximize your weight training efforts.

Another common workout split is the push/pull/legs split. This organizes workouts by muscle movement patterns rather than by specific muscles.

Exercises can target the smaller muscles within these major muscle groups, but trainers will often use these groups to build a structured workout split. This may include the full-body split and the upper/lower body split.

When it comes to weight training, the major muscle groups are:

Workout splits often organize workouts by different muscle groups or regions to maximize the energy, output, and strength of a certain muscle.

Split training refers to dividing weekly workout sessions or the volume of exercises into separate days to focus on individual elements. Some examples include full-body or push/pull/leg splits.

Splitting up your training throughout the week has several benefits, including maximizing strength and hypertrophy while minimizing your risk of injury.

Rest and recovery

A key aspect of split workout routines is giving your muscles enough time to recover.

Experts recommend allowing muscles to recover for 48 hours between each workout. So, if you train one muscle group on Monday evening, it’s best to wait until Wednesday evening to train it again.

The most common workout splits factor in this 48-hour rest period, but in different ways.

For example, the full-body split focuses on training all muscle groups in one session. If you do a workout on Monday, then you can do it again on Wednesday, then Friday, and so on.

The upper/lower split focuses on training the upper body and lower body muscles in separate workouts. If you train your upper body on a Monday, the muscles will rest during your lower body workout the following day.

Maximize strength during your workout

A split workout could help you better target certain muscles or movements when you feel fresh and energized at the beginning of a workout.

Research shows that exercise order affects performance over multiple sets. This means you might not be able to train a second movement as hard as your first one.

For example, if you squat before bench pressing, you may not get the most out of your bench press.

If you want to maximize full-body strength, try different exercises on separate days. Instead of doing a bench press following a squat on the same day, do the bench press first on one day and the squat first on a different day.

Exercise variety

A workout split routine can allow you to incorporate different exercises during the week that target a specific body part. For example, if you train biceps twice weekly, you can do hammer curls one day and preacher curls the other.

This may add variety to your weekly sessions while helping you target different parts of a muscle and increase your range of motion.

Sticking to a weekly routine

Having a workout split is a great way to incorporate exercise into your weekly routine and, most importantly, to stick with it.

For instance, if you have 30 minutes of exercise time on 4 to 7 days weekly, you might consider training your upper body on 2 days and your lower body on 2 days.

On the other hand, if you only have 2 or 3 days to exercise but longer periods, then a full-body split might be the best option for you.