TITLE: Strength Training for Weight Loss: Gaining Muscle and Losing Fat
AUTHOR: Kimmi Patterson
WEBSITE: health.umms.org
URL: https://health.umms.org/weight-loss/strength-training-for-weight-loss/
TYPE: Article

If you think lifting weights or doing squats or pushups is simply a path to a more sculpted physique, you’re selling strength training short. Strength training can also help you achieve weight loss for better health.

You probably know the common approach people use for losing weight: physical activity + eating fewer calories = weight loss. There’s more to it than that, though. The types of physical activity you choose can help support the success of your weight loss effort and overall health.

Cardio Versus Strength Training

Cardio, also called aerobic exercise, and strength training are two common types of exercise, but the benefits each provides are different. Think of cardio as a more vigorous activity that increases your heart and breathing rates. Whereas strength training is a resistance exercise that can build strength, power and even endurance of the muscles. Working on cardio can help your heart and blood vessels be more efficient, improve your resting blood pressure and heart rate, enhance your muscle endurance, and boost your body’s ability to utilize fat. Strength training, as long as the approach is balanced but progressively more difficult, can build muscle mass, improve strength for everyday functioning, decrease injuries and strengthen bones. Strength and cardio each build different types of muscle in the body, but, as a whole, that muscle mass can help our bodies turn into energy-burning machines.

Downsizing: How Strength Training Leads to Weight Loss

Strength training (sometimes called resistance training or weight training) can help you lose weight because of its effect on your muscles and, in turn, your metabolism. Lifting weights or performing other resistance exercises helps you build muscle mass. Specifically, it challenges our fast twitch muscle fibers, which control our muscle power and force. What we see in our body is improvement in muscle strength, muscle size and even muscle endurance.

As your muscle mass increases, so does your metabolism, which is key to burning calories. Our resting metabolism is based upon our fat-free mass, most of which is muscle. When we take the time to develop that muscle, we can also develop a higher metabolic rate. That means burning more calories even when you’re not exercising. Post-workout, if the intensity was high enough, you’ll benefit from an effect called excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC), which refers to the increased energy your body uses after a workout to recover, repair and return to its pre-exercise state. During this repair process, you’ll continue burning calories.

More Than Just Weight Loss

In addition to a smaller number on the scale, strength training can also reduce your body fat percentage. In one study, healthy adults who engaged in full-body resistance training for at least four weeks lost 1.4% of their body fat compared with adults who didn’t exercise.

Another study found that strength training reduces the risk of death from all causes by 10 to 17%. And strength training can help reduce the risk of bone and soft-tissue injuries.

Strength Training Exercises for Weight Loss

If you’re interested in weight training for weight loss, try it—just be sure to check with your medical provider first to be sure it’s safe and appropriate for you. Once you find an exercise or group of exercises you enjoy and that keep you engaged, you can gradually work on increasing the weight and intensity. This is called progressive overload, and it is essential to see changes in your body.

Certain strength training exercises, such as push-ups and squats, are especially effective at helping you burn fat and build muscle because they target multiple body parts at once. As you become comfortable with strength training, you can try harder variations and doing circuits—moving from exercise to exercise in quick succession during one workout. Strength training circuits can help boost your calorie burn by getting your heart rate up and serving as a way to do both cardio and strength at the same time.

Make Time to Strengthen Muscles

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends devoting at least 150 minutes a week to moderate-intensity cardio exercise. In addition, the agency also recommends engaging in exercises that strengthen all major muscle groups at least two days each week.

Consistency is important. Whether you run or lift weights, being a weekend warrior can increase your risk for injury. On the other hand, if you’re physically active throughout the week, you’ll reap the rewards of exercise while increasing your chance of staying safe.

Having trouble committing to regular strength training? Start with just 10 minutes two to three times a week. Find a buddy to go to the gym with you or to compete against for showing up to your sessions. Working on it together will help keep you both accountable. Bonus: you can serve as a motivator and spotter for each other when lifting weights.

Start Strong and Safe

Looking to start strength training for weight loss? Once your medical provider gives the green light and you select a group of exercises that provide a full-body workout, start slowly. To stay safe, master form and technique first. Working with an expert, such as a personal trainer, can help you learn to lift weights correctly so you can stay safe. If that is not an option, you can consider seeing a physical therapist who is familiar with gym-based exercise. Look for a sports physical therapist or one with a CSCS (strength and conditioning specialist) certification.

Before any strength training exercise, spend at least five minutes warming up by going for a brisk walk or doing some floor exercises, then add some stretches. Stretch again at the end of your workout to cool down and prevent injuries.

You can take other steps to have a safe and effective strength training session, including:

Don’t do too much too soon. Start with a weight that tires your muscles after around eight to 10 repetitions. Over time, you can slowly increase the weight and number of repetitions to keep building your muscle strength.

Start with a weight that tires your muscles after around eight to 10 repetitions. Over time, you can slowly increase the weight and number of repetitions to keep building your muscle strength. Keep breathing. Don’t hold your breath while exercising. Breathe calmly and evenly. Aim to breathe out when you push against the weight.

Don’t hold your breath while exercising. Breathe calmly and evenly. Aim to breathe out when you push against the weight. Listen to your body. If you experience noticeable or limiting pain during exercise, stop right away. This might be more than just regular soreness.

If you experience noticeable or limiting pain during exercise, stop right away. This might be more than just regular soreness. Rest to recover. Stressing your muscles during strength training causes minor but beneficial damage. Give your muscles one to two days to repair themselves—and grow stronger in the process—before your next strength training workout. Consider an active recovery day to help, such as walking or stretching.

More to Read

Need help getting back to the sport you love following an injury? Turn to the experts at University of Maryland Medical System. Find a sports medicine specialist

Medically reviewed by Claudia Dal Molin, DO, RMSK.