TITLE: Strength training for beginners
AUTHOR: Healthdirect Australia
WEBSITE: healthdirect.gov.au
URL: https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/strength-training-for-beginners
TYPE: Article

Key facts Strength training is any form of exercise that involves weights or resistance.

Strength training builds strength in your muscles and protects your bones and joints.

This type of training is an important part of your exercise program.

Strength training lowers your risk of heart disease, diabetes and can improve your mental health.

Seek advice from a doctor or an exercise professional before you start strength training.

What is strength training?

Strength training is any form of exercise that involves using weights or resistance to build strength in your muscles. Strength training is also known as resistance training.

Strength training involves either using equipment or your own body weight. For example:

push-ups

squats

lifting weights

using resistance bands

Household tasks can involve muscle strengthening.

These household activities are forms of strength training:

Moving boxes.

Digging in the garden.

Carrying groceries.

This is often called 'incidental exercise'.

What are the health benefits of strength training?

There are many health benefits of strength training.

Heart health

Strength training helps control your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, which lowers your risk of heart disease

Diabetes

Strength training lowers blood sugar levels, which helps prevent and control type-2 diabetes.

Weight control

When combined with a healthy diet, strength training can help you lose weight and avoid weight gain.

Mental health

Strength training helps prevent and manage mental health problems. It can also provide you with opportunities to socialise and meet new people.

Joint health

Strength training helps build muscle and take pressure off joints. This can mean you have less pain from arthritis or fibromyalgia.

Bone health

Any weight bearing exercise, such as strength training, improves bone density and reduces your risk of osteoporosis.

Injury

Having more strength in your muscles may lower your chance of falls. It can also help prevent injury during other sports such as running.

Can I do strength training?

Everyone can take part in some kind of strength training. You can do it with or without equipment and almost anywhere.

People with disability or chronic conditions

Strength training is key for people of all ability. Check with your doctor before you start any new form of exercise. Your doctor can suggest a way to train that best suits your situation. They might refer you to an exercise professional who can make a strength training program for you.

Pregnancy

If you are pregnant, you can take part in strength training both you and your baby are healthy. You should avoid using heavy weights and activities where you might be at risk of falling. Don't do any exercises that cause you pain.

Your GP, obstetrician or maternal health nurse can advise you on exercise during pregnancy. Or call 1800 882 436 to speak to a Pregnancy, Birth and Baby maternal child health nurse.

How often should I do strength training?

Try to strength train regularly. The Australian physical activity guidelines suggest that adults should do strength training at least 2 times a week.

People aged 65 years and older should aim for at least 30 minutes of activity per day. This should include exercises that build muscle strength at least 2 days per week. This may be training with weights, gardening or climbing stairs.

Children aged between 5 and 17 years should take part in strength training activities on at least 3 days a week. Children under the age of 5 years do not need to do strength training.

How do I start strength training in a safe way?

You can start strength training at a gym, at a park with friends or by yourself at home. Follow these steps to start strength training in safe way:

Health check

If you are new to strength training, it is good to get checked by a health professional before you start.

Movement screening

An exercise professional, such as a physiotherapist, can do a 'movement screen'. This can guide you through exercises are safe for you to do based on your ability.

Find a safe space

Before you begin, check that you have enough floor space for you and any equipment you are using.

Set your exercise goals

Build up your strength slowly by setting small goals that motivate you to do a little better each time. You should aim to train different muscle groups throughout the week.

ASK YOUR DOCTOR — Preparing for an appointment? Use the Question Builder for general tips on what to ask your GP or specialist.

FIND A HEALTH SERVICE — The Service Finder can help you find doctors, pharmacies, hospitals and other health services.

What equipment do I need for strength training?

Strength training can involve equipment, but you can also use your own body weight for resistance.

Exercises using your body weight include:

squats

push-ups

squats

lunges

Check out the Live Lighter guide for how to do these strength exercises.

If you prefer to use equipment, some options include:

free weights such as dumbbells

resistance bands

machines such as leg press

Machines are often found in gyms. The right equipment can help you focus on the muscle you are training. This can lower your chance of injury. Ask the gym staff for help if you are unsure how to use a machine.

It's important to learn how to use hand weights and resistance bands correctly. You will need to control how you move them to avoid injury. Start with light weights or gentle resistance until you improve your technique.

How do I avoid injury while strength training?

You can reduce your risk of injury when strength training by:

warming up properly

making sure you have the correct technique

slowly building up how much weight you use

avoiding any exercises that cause you pain

making sure you have at least one day off each week to recover

If you are using strength training to recover from illness or injury, talk to your doctor or exercise professional. They can guide you on the best way to avoid injury and the exercises that will suit you.

Common areas that can be injured when strength training include your:

lower back

knees

shoulders

Lower back strain

This happens in the muscles around your spine. This can happen when you use weights that are too heavy, or you exercise with the wrong posture. This usually happens during exercises such as deadlifts and squats.

Knee pain

This can happen when too many exercises place load on the knee. This is common with squat or lunge exercises.

Shoulder pain

This can occur when an exercise involves lots of shoulder movement. This often happens during overhead or bench press movements.

Delayed onset muscle soreness

Delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) is a normal response your body can have after exercise. It's not an injury — just a sign that your muscles are changing. You might feel sore for a few days, but the pain usually goes away in 5 to 7 days.

How do I stay motivated while strength training?

Feeling yourself getting stronger is great motivation. But you might find it hard to stick to a training schedule at times.

Having a health professional track your progress can motivate you to keep going.

Try mixing up your exercise routine to keep it fun and engaging. For example, you might train in your gym once a week, and train outside with a friend once a week.

You are also more likely to stick to an exercise program if you are training with a group.

Resources and Support

Live Lighter has a guide to physical exercise for beginners, including strength training.

Get Started offers a free telephone-based coaching service.

Find an exercise professional through Fitness Australia.

You can also call the healthdirect helpline on 1800 022 222 (known as NURSE-ON-CALL in Victoria). A registered nurse is available to speak with you 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.